[RM Ch04] RM Networing introdutory text (#1771)
cntt-n/CNTT: doc/ref_model/chapters/chapter04.md

<a name="4.3.1"></a>
### 4.3.1 Network Layering and Concepts

Cloud and Telco networking are layered, and it is very important to keep the layering dependencies low to enable security, separation and portability in between multiple implementations and generations.

Before we start developing a deep model we need to agree on some foundational concepts and layering that allow decoupling of implementations in between the layers. We will emphasize four concepts in this section:

 - Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts
 - Hardware and Virtual Infrastructure Layer concepts
 - Software Defined Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts 
 - Programmable Networking Fabric concept

<a name="4.3.1.1"></a>
#### 4.3.1.1 Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts

The ETSI NFV model divide networking in an Underlay and an Overlay Network layer. The purpose with this layering is to ensure separation of the Virtualisation Tenants (Workload) Overlay Networks from each other, whilst allowing the traffic to flow on the shared Underlay Network in between all Ethernet connected hardware (HW) devices.

> 

Author: @walterkozlowski There is no detailed reference to be made to specific ETSI statements of Underlay networking since they specifically mention that all HW layer management and HW (including switches) Control is out of scope, but that the Virtualization Infrastructure shall abstract the hardware. I have therefore rewritten the text to point of that fact

The ETSI Network Functions Virtualisation Architectural Framework (as referred above) describes how a Virtualization Layer instance abstract the hardware resources and separate Virtualisation Tenants (Workload) from each other. It does also specifically state that the control and implementation of the hardware layer is out of scope for that specification.

A major point with a Cloud Infrastructures is to automate as much as possible. An important tool for Networking automation is Software Defined Networking (SDN) that comes in many different shapes and can act on multiple layers of the networking. In this section we will deal with the internal networking of a datacentre and not how datacentres interconnect with each other or get access to the world outside of a datacentre.

When there are multiple simultaneously deployed instances of the Virtual Infrastructure Layers on the same HW Infrastructure, there is a need to ensure Underlay networking separation in the HW Infrastructure Layer. This separation can be done manually through provisioning of a statically configured separation of the Underlay Networking in the HW Infrastructure Layer. A better and more agile usage of the HW Infrastructure is to offer each instance of the Virtual Infrastructure Layer a unique instance of a SDN interface into the shared HW Infrastructure. Since these SDN instances only deals with a well separated portion (or slice) of the Underlay Networking we call this interface SDN-Underlay (SDNu).

> 

Author: @walterkozlowski Updated

> The HW Infrastructure Layer is responsible to keep the Underlay Networking well separated in between the different Virtual Infrastructure Layer instances which can be done through manual provisioning methods or be automated through a HW Infrastructure Layer orchestration interface. The separation responsibility is also valid in between each instance of the SDNu interface since each Virtual Infrastructure Layer instance shall not know about, be disturbed by or have any capability to reach the other Virtual Infrastructure instances.

Author: @walterkozlowski I have updated the initial sentence textual remarks, but mostly by reformulating the parts to be more specific to the intended description.
- The HW Infrastructure Layer is responsible for keeping the different Virtual Infrastructure Layer instances separated from each other in the Underlay Networking. (Its main task is not to keep Underlay Networking separate from the Virtual Infrastructure, although that also have to be done to enable the separation on the Virtual Infrastructure Layer.)

I can now see that I missed changing the textual remark on the first "each" to "all" in the last sentence, but that will be done shortly.

In cases where the VNF/CNF bypasses the Virtual Infrastructure Layer virtual switching and its encapsulation, as described above, the HW Infrastructure Layer must perform the encapsulation and mapping onto the Underlay Networking to ensure the Underlay Networking separation. This should be a prioritized capability in the SDNu control interface since CNTT currently allow exemptions for bypassing the virtual switching (e.g. through SR-IOV). 

SDNo controllers can request Underlay Networking encapsulation and mapping to be done by signalling to an SDNu controller. There are however today no standardized way for this signalling and by that there is a missing reference point and API description in this architecture. 

Multiple instances of Container as a Service (CaaS) Virtualization Layers running on an Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Virtual Infrastructure Layer could make use of the IaaS layer to handle the required Underlay Networking separation. In these cases, the IaaS Virtualisation Infrastructure Manager (VIM) could include a SDNu control interface enabling automation.

> > **Note:** The Reference Model describes a logical separation of SDNu and SDNo interfaces to clarify the separation of administrative domains where applicable. In real deployment cases an Operator can select to deploy a single SDN controller instance that implements all needed administrative domain separations or have separate SDN controllers for each administrative domain. A common deployment scenario today is to use a single SDN controller handling both Underlay and Overlay Networking which works on the implementation level whene there is only one administrative domain that owns both the HW Infrastructure and a single Virtual Infrastructure instance. However a shared Underlay Network that shall ensure separation must be under the control of the shared HW Infrastructure Layer.

Author: @walterkozlowski  Updated textal changes

One consequence of this is that the Reference Architectures must not model collapsed SDNo and SDNu controllers since each SDNo must stay unaware of other deployed implementations in the Virtual Infrastructure Layer running on the same HW Infrastructure.

> In the absence of a Networking Reference Model, both Reference Architectures have had no guidelines or Reference Models to refer to and by that their networking specifications have possibly been done as if they where the only single Virtual Infrastructure instance on a dedicated HW Infrastructure resource pool in a shared single administrative domain. Hence, when Networking now gets introduced into the Reference Model, it is important that SDN also is considered and that the two now existing Reference Architectures are harmonised with the new common Networking Reference Model, if adjustments are found to be needed. 

Reviewer: @TFredberg, I agree with the last paragraph but I would add it to the Note, as in later versions, after the harmonization is done, this comment will have no sense.

Author: @walterkozlowski Removed last paragrapf in the Note nd saved it for next release.

Throughout this chapter and its figures a number of references to ETSI NFV are made and they explicitly are made towards the ETSI NFV models in the Architectural Framework: 
-	[ETSI GS NFV 002 V1.2.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/002/01.02.01_60/gs_NFV002v010201p.pdf)
-	[ETSI GR NFV-IFA 029 V3.3.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/NFV-IFA/001_099/029/03.03.01_60/gr_NFV-IFA029v030301p.pdf)

<a name="4.3.1"></a>
### 4.3.1 Network Layering and Concepts

Cloud and Telco networking are layered, and it is very important to keep the dependencies between the layers low to enable security, separation and portability in between multiple implementations and generations.

Before we start developing a deep model we need to agree on some foundational concepts and layering that allow decoupling of implementations in between the layers. We will emphasize four concepts in this section:

 - Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts
 - Hardware and Virtual Infrastructure Layer concepts
 - Software Defined Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts 
 - Programmable Networking Fabric concept

<a name="4.3.1.1"></a>
#### 4.3.1.1 Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts

> The ETSI Network Functions Virtualisation Architectural Framework (as referred  above) describes how a Virtualization Layer instance abstract the hardware resources and separate Virtualisation Tenants (Workload) from each other. It does also specifically state that the control and implementation of the hardware layer is out of scope for that specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ETSI Network Functions Virtualisation Architectural Framework (as referred  above) describes how a Virtualization Layer instance abstracts the hardware resources and separate Virtualisation Tenants (Workload) from each other. It does also specifically state that the control and implementation of the hardware layer is out of scope for that specification.
```

When having multiple Virtualization Layer instances on a shared hardware infrastructure, the networking can be layered in an Underlay and an Overlay Network layer. The purpose with this layering is to ensure separation of the Virtualisation Tenants (Workload) Overlay Networks from each other, whilst allowing the traffic to flow on the shared Underlay Network in between all Ethernet connected hardware (HW) devices.

> The Overlay Networking separation is often done through encapsulation of Tenants traffic using overlay protocols e.g. through VxLAN or EVPN on the Underlay Networks e.g. based on L2 (VLAN) or L3 (IP) networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Overlay Networking separation is often done through encapsulation of Tenant traffic using overlay protocols e.g. through VxLAN or EVPN on the Underlay Networks e.g. based on L2 (VLAN) or L3 (IP) networks.
```

> In some instances, the Virtualisation Tenants can bypass the Overlay Networking encapsulation to achieve better performance or network visibility/control. A common method to bypass the Overlay Networking encapsulation normally done by the Virtualisation Layer, is the VNF/CNF usage of SR-IOV that effectively take over the Physical and Virtual Functions of the NIC directly into the VNF/CNF Tenant. In these cases, the Underlay Networking must handle the separation e.g. through a Virtual Termination End Point (VTEP) that encapsulate the Overlay Network traffic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some instances, the Virtualisation Tenants can bypass the Overlay Networking encapsulation to achieve better performance or network visibility/control. A common method to bypass the Overlay Networking encapsulation, normally done by the Virtualisation Layer, is the VNF/CNF usage of SR-IOV that effectively takes over the Physical and Virtual Functions of the NIC directly into the VNF/CNF Tenant. In these cases, the Underlay Networking must handle the separation e.g. through a Virtual Termination End Point (VTEP) that encapsulate the Overlay Network traffic.
```

> **Note:** Bypassing the Overlay Networking layer is a violation of the basic CNTT decoupling principles, but in some cases unavoidable with existing technologies and available standards. Until suitable technologies and standards are developed, CNTT have a set of agreed exemptions that forces the Underlay Networking to handle the bypassed Overlay Networking separation.

> VTEP could be manually provisioned in the Underlay Networking or be automated and controlled through a Software Defined Networking controller interfaces into the underlying networking in the HW Infrastructure Layer. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
VTEP could be manually provisioned in the Underlay Networking or be automated and controlled through Software Defined Networking (SDN) controller interfaces into the underlying networking in the HW Infrastructure Layer. 
```

<a name="4.3.1.2"></a>
#### 4.3.1.2 Hardware and Virtual Infrastructure Layer concepts

The Cloud Infrastructure (based on ETSI NFV Infrastructure with hardware extensions) can be considered to be composed of two distinct layers, here referred to as HW Infrastructure Layer and Virtual Infrastructure Layer. When there are multiple separated simultaneously deployed Virtual Infrastructure domains, the architecture and deployed implementations must enable each of them to be in individual non-dependent administrative domains. The HW Infrastructure must then also be enabled to be a fully separated administrative domain from all of the Virtualisation domains. 

For Cloud Infrastructure implementations of multiple well separated simultaneous Virtual Infrastructure Layer instances on a shared HW Infrastructure there must be a separation of the hardware resources i.e. servers, storage and the Underlay Networking resources that interconnect the hardware resources e.g. through a switching fabric.

> To allow multiple separated simultaneous Virtual Infrastructure Layer instances onto a shared switching fabric there is a need to split up the Underlay Networking resources into non overlapping addressing domains on suitable protocols e.g. VxLAN with their VNI Ranges. This separation must be done through an administrative domain that could not be compromised by any of the individual Virtualisation Infrastructure Layer domains either by malicious or unintentional Underlay Network mapping or configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To allow multiple separated simultaneous Virtual Infrastructure Layer instances onto a shared switching fabric there is a need to split up the Underlay Networking resources into non overlapping addressing domains on suitable protocols e.g. VxLAN with their VNI Ranges. This separation must be done through an administrative domain that can't be compromised by any of the individual Virtualisation Infrastructure Layer domains either by malicious or unintentional Underlay Network mapping or configuration.
```

These concepts are very similar to how the Hyperscaler Cloud Providers (HCP) offer Virtual Private Clouds for users of Bare Metal deployment on the HCP shared pool of servers, storage and networking resources.

The separation of Hardware and Virtual Infrastructure Layers administrative domains makes it important that the Reference Architectures do not include direct management or dependencies of the pooled physical hardware resources in the HW Infrastructure Layer e.g. servers, switches and underlay networks from within the Virtual Infrastructure Layer. All automated interaction from the Virtual Infrastructure Layer implementations towards the HW Infrastructure with its shared networking resources in the HW Infrastructure Layer must go through a common abstracted Reference Model interface. 

<a name="4.3.1.3"></a>
#### 4.3.1.3 Software Defined Underlay and Overlay Networking concepts

> A major point with a Cloud Infrastructures is to automate as much as possible. An important tool for Networking automation is Software Defined Networking (SDN) that comes in many different shapes and can act on multiple layers of the networking. In this section we will deal with the internal networking of a datacentre and not how datacentres interconnect with each other or get access to the world outside of a datacentre.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A major point with Cloud Infrastructures is to automate as much as possible. An important tool for Networking automation is Software Defined Networking (SDN) that comes in many different shapes and can act on multiple layers of the networking. In this section we will deal with the internal networking of a datacentre and not how datacentres interconnect with each other or get access to the world outside of a datacentre.
```

<a name="4.3"></a>
## 4.3 Networking

> The Cloud Infrastructure Networking Reference Model is an essential foundation that governance all Reference Architectures and Cloud Infrastructure implementations to enable a continuous evolution and migration from current single Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) based virtualization instances with Virtual Machines (VM) into tomorrow’s multitude of Cloud Native Container as a Service (CaaS) based virtualization instances.  

Reviewer 2: does the networking reference model not support the "current Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) based virtualization instances"? I think you want to state is that it supports the "current widely used single Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) based virtualization instances", and the evolving "multi IaaS based virtualization instances", "Cloud Native Container as a Service (CaaS) based virtualization instances" and the "hybrid multi IaaS and CaaS based virtualization instances." since that will make a very complex sentence, it may be best to insert the choices as a list.

```suggestion
The Cloud Infrastructure Networking Reference Model is an essential foundation that governs all Reference Architectures and cloud infrastructure implementations to enable multiple cloud infrastructure virtualisation technology choices and their evolution. These include:
- the current single Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) based virtualisation instances with Virtual Machines (VM)
- multi IaaS based virtualisation instances
- Cloud Native Container as a Service (CaaS) based virtualisation instances, and
- hybrid multi IaaS and CaaS based virtualisation instances
```

Author: @pgoyal01 Implemented table and rewording as a more descriptive way of handling current and future networking needs, but I kept the capitalized Cloud Infrastructure since it is our specific CNTT Cloud Infrastructure instances that I talk about and not any generic cloud infrastructure instances.

> To retain the Cloud paradigms of automation, scalability and usage of shared hardware resources when introducing CaaS instances it is necessary to enable an ability to co-deploy multiple simultaneous IaaS and CaaS instances on a shared pool of hardware resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To retain the cloud paradigms of automation, scalability and usage of shared hardware resources when introducing CaaS instances it is necessary to enable an ability to co-deploy multiple simultaneous IaaS and CaaS instances on a shared pool of hardware resources.
```

Author: @pgoyal01 updated

> Compute and Storage resources are rarely shared in between IaaS or CaaS instances, but the underpinning networking most commonly implemented with Ethernet and IP, must be shared and managed to have a shared pool of hardware resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compute and Storage resources are rarely shared in between IaaS or CaaS instances, but the underpinning networking, most commonly implemented with Ethernet and IP, must be shared and managed as a shared pool of hardware resources.
```

Author: @pgoyal01 Updated the textual sugested changes, and added some clarifications on sharing of underlay networking resources

Throughout this chapter and its figures a number of references to ETSI NFV are made and they explicitly are made towards the ETSI NFV models in the Architectural Framework: 
-	[ETSI GS NFV 002 V1.2.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/002/01.02.01_60/gs_NFV002v010201p.pdf)
-	[ETSI GR NFV-IFA 029 V3.3.1](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gr/NFV-IFA/001_099/029/03.03.01_60/gr_NFV-IFA029v030301p.pdf)

<a name="4.3.1"></a>
### 4.3.1 Network Layering and Concepts

> Cloud and Telco networking are layered, and it is very important to keep the layering dependencies low to enable security, separation and portability in between multiple implementations and generations.

Reviewer 2: isn't most networking layered?
layering dependencies --->  dependencies between the layers

Author: @pgoyal01 Yes, most networking is layered, but I feel the text is needed to later in the text point out that we here need to ensure strict layering is kept, since many implementations in real life are jumping the layers.
Changed the textual of layering dependencies.
